Managing Partner: Editorial The IJ Hub NPC is a non-profit company spun off by the amaBhungane Centre for Investigative Journalism to serve investigative journalism in Southern Africa. The Hub supports and builds the capacity of investigative journalism centres and journalists via i.a. fellowships, workshops, networking, editorial assistance and organisational advice. It also raises philanthropic funding to support member centres. Current member centres are based in Namibia, Botswana, Zambia, Malawi, Swaziland, Lesotho and South Africa. We are seeking to appoint a managing partner: editorial, who will lead and manage the Hub jointly with the managing partner: organisational. Purpose: Provide strategic leadership with the board and co-managing partner • Plan and implement the Hub’s editorial support and capacity building activities • Complement the co-managing partner w.r.t. the Hub’s corporate management • Co-manage grant-making to member centres • Help build and manage stakeholder relationships. Key deliverables: Arrange investigative fellowship placements at suitable newsrooms and provide fellows with mentoring and training • Arrange, and from time to time present, editorial training workshops • Provide editorial support to member centre journalists, e.g. where necessary mentor them, edit their stories and have these placed with external publishers • Network with member centres for i.a. investigative collaborations and story syndication • Help to process and adjudicate member centre grant applications • Assist the managing partner: organisational where necessary with fundraising, financial administration and compliance. Applicants must: Demonstrate relevant journalism experience and competence • Have a firm grasp of investigative journalism • Be a good mentor, writer and copy editor • Have a fair grasp of corporate and financial administration • Be a self-motivator able to work individually and in a team. • Have the right to live and work in South Africa. Attributes that will be a plus: Knowledge of the political economy and media landscape of Southern Africa • Internet and social media savvy. This role is based in Johannesburg and reports to the Hub’s board. A competitive remuneration package is offered. Individuals from a previously disadvantaged background are encouraged to apply. Please email a comprehensive CV and a short letter of motivation (max 1 page) to ijhubrecruitment@gmail.com by 17H00 (Johannesburg Time) on 18 November 2020. The CV and letter should speak to the above selection criteria. Generalised motivation letters which do not address the selection criteria will not be considered. Only shortlisted candidates will be contacted. If you have not heard from the IJ Hub within 2 weeks of the closing date please consider you application as unsuccessful.