Editorial coordinator/quality controller/rewrite artist We are an independent non-profit newsroom that develops investigative journalism – a public interest task that promotes free, capable media and open, accountable, just democracy. We do so via: Investigations: Developing best practice by doing stories that are accurate and fair, advance methods and standards, expose wrongdoing and empower people to hold power to account. Investigations support: Helping others do it too via editorial collaboration and training. Advocacy: Campaigning, exercising laws and litigating to help secure the information rights – access to information and media freedoms – that are the lifeblood of our field. We are based in Johannesburg, Durban and Cape Town and publish via www.amabhungane.org and a range of publication partners. We are seeking to appoint an editorial coordinator/quality controller/rewrite artist to work closely with our small complement of investigators, digital coordinator and managing partners to get our stories out there with an emphasis on accessibility, accuracy and fairness. This post is suited to a media practitioner with an analytical mind and a talent with words. The incumbent will work closely with the investigators and managing partners on story production and processing. A behind-the-bylines role, your participation will be key to getting the dung out there in shape and on target. Purpose • Coach investigators on content structure during conceptualisation and writing • Evaluate and improve content by asking key analytical questions and flagging ethical/legal hazards throughout process • Finalise content in collaboration with investigators and managing partners in an iterative process of writing, fact checking and editing • Identify and introduce tools and techniques to enhance accessibility, reach and impact • Help package content for publication in collaboration with digital coordinator and team • Facilitate editorial collaboration Key deliverable • Develop investigative journalism best practice by helping to birth stories that are accurate and fair, advance methods and standards, expose wrongdoing and empower people to hold power to account. Any applicant must • be a seasoned investigative journalist or have extensive behind-the-byline experience • have strong analytical and writing skills • be a self-motivator with strong project management skills Attributes that will be a plus • editorial experience at a senior level • knowledge of the Southern African political economy and international media landscape • internet, social media and data savvy The successful applicant will be based in Johannesburg and report to the managing partners. A competitive remuneration package is offered. Individuals from a previously disadvantaged background are encouraged to apply. Please email your CV and a short letter of motivation to lizels@amabhungane.org by 23 October 2020. The CV and letter should speak to the above criteria. Only shortlisted candidates will be contacted.